This is a Sony Handycam. And about three
decades ago, it featured an upgrade that
changed the world.
It wasn't the screen or the viewfinder,
and it didn't replace this thing.
It was the battery.
The lithium-ion battery, [music] to be
exact, which was lighter and more
powerful, and it was about to set off a
massive change in consumer technology.
>> Suddenly, Sony [music] had in its hand
this product that was selling like hot
cakes that it wanted to put not just in
the one camcorder, but in every device
it could find.
>> [music]
>> Over time, the price of batteries went
down
>> [music]
>> and the power they packed went up.
>> And what we know from Wright's law is
that the more you make something, the
cheaper you can make it.
>> Fast forward to the 2020s, and batteries
[music] had improved in power and cost
so much that they helped kick off
another electronic revolution.
>> [music]
>> This time, in automobiles.
Now, just like with consumer
electronics, batteries are helping make
EVs more affordable, driving adoption
around the world.
>> You're not driving a car, you're driving
a battery.
>> And China right now is the leader in
batteries.
>> China's EVs are already cheaper, on
average, than similar gas cars.
And it's no surprise that four of the
top five battery makers in the world are
located here.
Also, one of them, BYD, has been
jockeying with Tesla for years for the
title of the world's biggest EV maker.
All that success means lots of
competition at home, propelling China to
look outward for expansion.
And while some big markets like the US
and the EU have resisted China's cheaper
EVs, many emerging markets have brought
them in.
>> They're kind of upsetting the chessboard
of global [music] power.
No pun intended.
Sorry. [laughter]
>> That's okay. I love a pun.
>> [music]
>> China's dominance in global lithium-ion
has sparked companies worldwide to
recharge their own [music] efforts in
battery technology from new chemistry to
production techniques in an effort to
disrupt the status quo.
>> [music]
>> And with great power comes, well, a
great opportunity for profit.
>> [music]
>> This sounds like
distant thunder. [music] Feels like the
sound of money.
>> When you drive an electric vehicle, that
car is powered by the movement of teeny
tiny electrons. [music] A clever bit of
science that converts chemical energy to
electricity.
Inside a lithium-ion battery is a system
built of layers.
The cathode is on one side, often made
up of a special combo of metals. [music]
And then there's the anode on the other
side.
Usually made of graphite.
In an EV battery, charged lithium atoms
called ions move from one end to the
other.
And their electrons take the scenic
route through an external circuit,
creating the flow of [music] electricity
that makes the car go
quietly.
Between them is the [music]
all-important separator. Cuz if the two
ends touch,
well, you get the picture.
And the batteries are filled a liquid
electrolyte, which helps the ions flow
between layers.
But here's the thing.
China's cornered the market [music] on
every one of these components.
This is Sam Arden. He's a research
analyst on the battery industry and
knows a lot about the ins and outs of
its supply chain.
>> A lot of people assumed that we just dig
up the raw materials and then we put
them together in a battery cell, right?
But in reality this is a very complex
interwoven supply chain.
>> [music]
>> Let's take lithium, for example. I mean,
it's in the name, right?
>> So things like lithium [music] can be
found in places like salt flats of
Chile, the hard rock mines of Australia.
Miners extract raw materials [music]
from the earth and then those raw
materials are shipped to refining
plants, which are usually in China,
uh to be processed into the refined
chemicals [music] and the powders that
are actually useful for making
batteries.
>> Lithium is refined into lithium
carbonate and lithium hydroxide.
And this processing step is where China
has really created a bottleneck.
Just look at how much China controls
each part of a battery.
>> That battery cell gets grouped together
into a battery module or battery pack
that goes into your smartphone, your
electric car, or into a grid-scale
battery energy storage system. [music]
>> In addition to that supply chain, the
Chinese government poured hundreds of
billions into subsidies for the EV
industry.
>> Basically, as early as 2001, the Chinese
government wanted um batteries and other
advanced technology to become a bigger
driver for the economy.
And it was in 2015 when they came up
with this Made in China 2025 plan
[music] where they made um
batteries along with EVs and robotics as
strategic priorities for the future.
>> They started out with um public buses,
making those electric. They had all
kinds of sticks and carrots. It's hard
to get a license plate for a new car,
but if you buy an EV, you can get
[music] one faster. You know, things
like that to encourage people to buy
electric cars. And all of that kind of
state support that kind of created this
stable
environment in which
>> [music]
>> new battery and EV companies could
thrive because they knew that long-term
there was going to be demand [music] for
the product cuz the state was behind it.
>> That sustained support, combined with a
vertically integrated supply chain and a
talented pool of engineers, helped
Chinese battery companies commercialize
an overlooked bit of battery chemistry
and cracked the code on cheaper EVs.
Just how cheap? Well, [music] in China,
one of the most popular EVs is BYD's
Seagull. It's tiny and only has a range
of 190 miles.
>> [music]
>> Compare that to one of the cheapest new
EVs in the US, the 2026 Nissan Leaf. It
has a range of about 300 miles. [music]
The difference though is in price. You
can buy about three Seagulls in China
for one Leaf in the US. And part of that
is because the Seagull uses a cheaper
battery, lithium ion phosphate or LFP.
FYI, we're about to talk about a lot of
initialisms. They may be a PITA, but
they are the SOP in the world of EVs.
>> [music]
>> A lot of the innovation with lithium ion
batteries now has to do at the component
level. On the cathode, there was the
lithium ion phosphate cathode, LFP,
[music] developed by Americans but
scaled up by China.
It used cheap raw materials like iron
and phosphorus,
but it had a bunch of limitations.
>> [music]
>> It couldn't store a lot of energy,
whereas the nickel manganese cobalt
cathode or NMC, was a lot more energy
dense.
>> Even though NMC [music]
packed more energy, the cheaper LFP
cells showed promise.
>> And so, chemists [music] began
making tweaks to LFP batteries with
small chemistry changes, small
structural changes, and [music] every
year the LFP battery started to become a
little more energy dense. And because
China was the place where LFP batteries
were finding its most development, they
also lowered in price faster than NMC
batteries did. So, today most electric
cars produced in China are powered by
LFP batteries.
>> And they're still improving.
Last year, Chinese companies announced
that their newest LFP batteries can
recharge in about the same amount of
time it takes to refuel a gas car.
>> That technical innovation goes hand in
hand with the supply chain.
>> But they've hit some bumps in the road.
>> [music]
>> For years, China was investing heavily
in domestic EV supply chains. But thanks
to overcapacity and price wars, 2024 was
the first time Chinese companies [music]
invested more overseas than at home.
But we'll get to that later. [music]
Meanwhile, other players are hoping to
disrupt the dominant technology and
compete on the global stage.
>> [music]
>> General Motors, [music] founded in 1908,
is one of the OGs of the internal
combustion engine.
They also built one of the world's first
modern electric cars, called the EV1,
all the way back in the '90s.
But GM canceled the project after heavy
[music] losses.
Since then, GM's made headway when it
comes to EVs.
>> [music]
>> And now, they're trying to kickstart a
new kind of battery technology.
>> We've got a chemistry in
that we think it's going to be really
competitive. It's a leapfrogging of what
they've got in in China.
>> This is Kurt Kelty. He's a Tesla veteran
who's been working in batteries [music]
since Sony introduced lithium ion to the
world.
Now, Kelty and his team are betting on a
new kind of chemistry called LMR, or
lithium manganese rich. Another
initialism, I know.
>> So, this is the final form of the LMR
cathode [music] active material. It
contains all the the added pixie dust
that uh is going to make it work
optimally
uh in a in a vehicle.
>> That pixie dust [music] is a new cathode
mix that boosts manganese, reduces
nickel, and nearly eliminates [music]
cobalt.
GM claims that the shift in chemistry
lowers cost without losing too much
range.
>> So, with the the Silverado, we get 492
mi.
>> [music]
>> That's with a high-nickel cell. If you
end up using a an LFP cell, you're going
to get about 350 mi of range. Well, if
you use LMR, you're going [music] to get
about 400 mi of range. So, it's right
It's It's in between them.
>> GM hopes to launch commercial LMR
batteries for SUVs and pickup trucks in
2028. They're also hoping to bring their
supply chain closer to home.
>> What we've been doing over the last four
or five years is trying to reduce our
reliance on FEOC-based countries,
including China.
>> [music]
>> And
the most challenging part has definitely
been the cathode material, the most
expensive part. The graphite has also
been challenging. Our intention is to
have this all outside of China by by
>> GM has invested in several projects to
build up a battery supply chain in North
America. [music]
Shifts in policy have cost GM billions
and can make it harder to establish a
supply chain.
>> The problem is every 48 years the United
States does a 180 and have a totally
different policy. The government
certainly didn't make it easier on them
by changing course every so often.
>> Mr. President.
>> This sector is quick. You know, they're
having a hard time with the electric
vehicles and they want us to pay
billions of dollars in subsidy. [music]
>> I don't think the US
car companies can compete with China
right now, but I think
if they have a chance at it, they need
to continue to innovate. It's definitely
an uphill battle.
>> GM isn't alone in its experimentation.
Startups around the world have raised
billions to find the next best battery.
>> I don't think the future is at all
settled and there's lots of different
>> [music]
>> chemistries. I like to think of them as
ice cream flavors. Everyone's trying out
different combinations to see what works
best. [music]
>> And it'll take a lot of trial, error,
and money to see what new tech actually
succeeds. [music]
Meanwhile, Chinese battery companies are
expanding all over.
Even
here.
>> [music]
>> So, in 2006, Gotion was founded in
Hefei, China. But today, the company has
expanded [music] into the US market with
the first factory being here in Manteno,
Illinois.
We are going to be making LFP [music]
batteries or lithium ion phosphate
batteries.
>> Gotion is one of the world's largest
lithium ion battery [music] makers.
Its new Midwestern facility will make
batteries for [music] EVs, energy
storage systems or ESS, which are used
to supplement the electric grid, and
this thing.
>> Scrap this bad boy,
plug it in.
That's it.
>> [music]
>> In the past few years, Gotion built
several overseas facilities around the
world.
And now it's flipping the script on an
old American tale.
>> What are the biggest challenges of
setting up a factory in the US?
>> There's a lot that goes into building a
factory.
Um and even a company that has built
many factories before, it's not just
simply a copy and paste.
>> [music]
>> When it comes to manufacturing, the US
is a bit rusty.
>> You have to build something from scratch
that hasn't been here before or hasn't
been here in decades. That know-how and
technology and that manufacturing
experience, that's things that the US
used to do. We decided it wasn't
important anymore and outsourced it. And
that's been the model for the last,
you know, 50 years or so.
>> Enter international collaboration.
>> It's perfectly possible [music] to make
batteries outside of China reasonably
cost-effective. And one of those
pathways is actually working with the
Chinese companies.
>> Collaboration [music] helped Chinese
manufacturers get to where they are
today.
In the '90s, [music] China implemented
the 50/50 rule. Foreign auto firms could
only operate through a joint venture
[music] with a local company.
The car companies expanded their markets
and their Chinese counterparts got
knowledge spillover.
Gotion's Illinois factory has 300
employees and plans to scale up to 750
by the end of 2026.
This is the man responsible for pulling
that off. Mark Krusell.
>> So, I've been in manufacturing my entire
life. [music]
So, ever since I was 23, I see this as a
great opportunity to bring this type of
manufacturing to the US.
I don't want to see the US be left
behind like we were being left behind.
>> A key part of the modern American
factory
lots of robots.
>> So, this is a very highly automated
plant. Gotion's most automated plant
today. We call it generation 7. So, they
had generation 6 in China and we have
generation uh 7 here in the US. The
first thing is you get better
consistency, better quality
with automation. And secondly, we get to
reduce some of the manpower cost. So,
automation is a little more
cost-effective in the US than in China.
>> Gotion's expansion is part of a larger
trend of Chinese [music] companies
setting up factories outside of China to
capture new markets and avoid [music]
protectionist tariffs.
But, the company's US expansion hasn't
[music] all been smooth driving.
>> Many people throughout Michigan came to
today's rally voicing their concerns of
the company's ties to China and the
environmental effects.
>> 3 years later, Gotion's additional 2.36
billion dollar battery materials plant
in Michigan is temporarily on hold.
[music]
The hesitation goes both ways. The
Chinese government wants to keep the lid
on its technology with stronger export
controls on various parts of the lithium
ion supply chain.
>> China's uh battery making technology as
well as their EV technology is world
class and they're afraid that the US or
or the or Europe is going to be able to
sort of use that technology for their
own uh
purposes making China less competitive.
>> Needless to say, this is all very
challenging for EV and battery makers
seeking new shores.
But they may not have much choice.
>> I always like to think about the US
economy and the Chinese economy is sort
of like this one is like the photo
negative of the other. Like the US
[music] economy is driven by consumption
and China's economy is driven by
investment in production and R&D.
[music]
They have all this capacity to make all
this stuff, EVs, batteries, and they
need to sell it in the rest of the world
to keep everybody in China employed.
[music] Expanding overseas is really
important for any of these Chinese
companies because they need new markets
to keep growing.
>> I would say that there's a lot of
geopolitical uncertainty [music] making
companies a little bit hesitant.
However, conservatively, our marketing
research tells us that there will be
over 500 gigawatt hours of demand for
batteries [music] just in the North
America region alone. And Gotion
definitely wants to be a part of that.
>> It's not just the US. Demand for
batteries is growing globally, which
means demand for raw materials.
But what if you didn't have to mine all
over the world to make your batteries?
>> [music]
>> We have everything from a small hybrid
battery to a a large EV battery.
Uh over there you have a
a shiny battery easy to dismantle.
Other models here are are are more
corroded and more more challenging to
[music]
to take apart.
>> We're doing the the coolest thing there
is. We are
turning waste into [music] important
critical raw materials for
new batteries.
>> In Norway, one in three passenger cars
on the road is electric, making it a
prime environment for recycling.
That's where Hydrovolt comes in.
Since the types of batteries can vary,
Hydrovolt has to design a recycling
process for each kind.
Today, they're up to about 200 different
batteries.
The process [music] begins with D&D.
No, not that one.
Discharge and dismantle.
>> Uh over on this side,
we have um six discharging stations.
That's sort of the most critical step,
getting the energy out of the battery.
And then uh then we move to the uh
dismantling part.
We take off
uh electronics. We take off uh cables.
Uh
we take off uh plastic materials.
>> [music]
>> We're in the control room, the heart of
this uh
this plant.
These are battery modules falling into
the crusher, ready to [music] be
be crushed and and shredded into to
pieces.
First uh a coarse crushing and then a
finer crushing
afterwards.
>> [music]
>> This mechanical shredding process, along
with several drying and sorting steps,
results in a material mix called black
mass.
>> This is a really fine [music]
black powder which contains the heavy
metals like uh lithium, manganese,
cobalt, nickel oxides.
So, here we are conducting a measurement
and the uh main components that we're
looking for is the nickel and cobalt,
which is most valuable, so that our
customers will know how much is in the
black mass when they refine it.
>> That black mass is sold to chemical
companies, mostly in South Korea and
Europe, which refine it back into
battery-grade material, keeping those
same metals in motion from old batteries
into new [music] ones in a new circular
economy.
Another benefit [music] is that it
bypasses the troubling human rights
record and environmental damage that
plague the global mining industry.
>> And the challenge now is to make the
business [music] profitable.
>> Norway requires producers [music] and
importers to pay to have their batteries
recycled, but the economics still tough.
Black mass is priced [music] at a
discount based on the cost of metal
components, which can be volatile.
Plus, Europe's battery supply chain,
which would form an important customer
base for Hydrovolt, [music]
has been slow to develop.
In fact, Hydrovolt was initially
launched to supply Northvolt, a Swedish
startup battery maker that was hailed as
a viable counter to Asia.
Unfortunately, Northvolt went bankrupt
after it expanded too fast and delivered
too many faulty cells.
But as more EVs age and come off the
road in Norway, Hydrovolt hopes the
increased supply of EV batteries will
help the company scale up operations.
>> We know we're
at the very beginning of a very exciting
journey.
>> [music]
>> We see all the electric cars
outside on the on the roads and in
in 10
>> [music]
>> 15 years, they will be they will be
here.
>> [music]
>> It's hard to believe how much has
changed since this unassuming battery
was first introduced and unlocked a
future we couldn't imagine at the time.
>> [music]
>> Batteries have changed the world once
and they can change the world again
because the applications for batteries
are many and growing and the need for
those applications to work is [music]
getting deeper because we have to meet
climate goals, because we have to cut
the cost of energy [music]
and because we like cool devices.
The future is zero emission vehicles.
It's just a matter of when.
>> [music]
>> That EV revolution has hit a fork in the
road, and the pace of adoption is going
to be uneven. The US government is
betting big on oil rather than ions
[music] to move people and goods. And
the EU has rolled back their 2035 ban on
combustion engine vehicles.
But long-term, any car company that
wants to be globally competitive needs
to make affordable EVs, and batteries
[music]
are the key to unlocking that goal.